Reorganize Menus: Get Started and Concepts (no tutorials) (#261)
posit-dev/py-shiny-site: get-started/what-is-shiny.qmd

---
title: What is Shiny?
---

```{=html}
<style>
  .btn-links {
    display: flex;
    gap: 1.5rem;
    flex-wrap: wrap;
    justify-content: center;
  }

  .btn-link-large {
    display: flex;
    flex-direction: column;
    align-items: center;
    justify-content: center;
    width: 150px;
    height: 150px;
    font-size: 1.5rem;
    border: 1px solid transparent;
    border-radius: 10px;
    cursor: pointer;
    padding: 1.25rem;
    text-decoration: none;
    box-shadow: 0 4px 8px rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.1);
  }

  .btn-link-large i {
    margin-top: 10px;
    font-size: 2rem;
  }

  .btn-link-large:hover {
    text-decoration: none;
    border: 1px solid var(--bs-primary);
  }
</style>
```

> Whether you’re a data scientist, analyst, or developer, Shiny makes it easy to [create](create-run.qmd) rich, [interactive experiences](/docs/ui-overview.qmd) in pure Python [without needing](/docs/reactive-foundations.qmd) to learn JavaScript or front-end frameworks.

Reviewer: Links should always make sense if read entirely out of context. Here "interactive experiences" links to UI (makes sense), but "without needing" links to reactive foundations. Always make sure that if you read only the link text, the place where it takes you makes sense.

In this case, I think you could either drop the link or work in the word "reactive".

## Batteries included {#batteries-included}

> Shiny for Python comes fully equipped with everything you need to build a dashboard right out of the box, including a rich set of [input](/components/#inputs) and [output](/components/#outputs) [components](/components/) so you can quickly build interactive applications.

Reviewer: Another link comment: visually there's no separation between `output` and `components` so they look like one continuous link when you're viewing the page. In general, it's best to avoid directly adjacent links unless there's a word or punctuation between the links. In this case, I don't think we gain anything from linking "components", so I'd recommend dropping that link.

```suggestion
Shiny for Python comes fully equipped with everything you need to build a dashboard right out of the box, including a rich set of [input](/components/#inputs) and [output](/components/#outputs) components so you can quickly build interactive applications.
```

Shiny's reactive engine avoids unnecessary computations by only re-calculating the outputs whose inputs have changed, making Shiny ideal for fast data-driven applications, enabling live updates for [charts, tables](/components/#outputs), and [reports](https://quarto.org/docs/interactive/shiny/) with minimal effort.

Below is a Shiny application where you have the output text react to _both_ input slider values
and the second row of text _only_ reacts to the first slider value.

```{shinylive-python}
#| standalone: true
#| components: [editor, viewer]
#| layout: vertical
#| viewerHeight: 250

from shiny import reactive
from shiny.express import ui, render, input

# input slider 1
ui.input_slider("slider1", "Slider 1", min=1, max=50, value=20)

# input slider 2
ui.input_slider("slider2", "Slider 2", min=1, max=50, value=40)

# output reacts to both sliders
@render.text
def both_sliders_output():
    return f"You have set Slider 1: {input.slider1()}, Slider 2: {input.slider2()}"

# output that only reacts to slider 1
@render.text
def result():
    return f"The value for slider 1 squared: {input.slider1()**2}."
```

## Templates {#templates}

> Hit the ground running with `shiny create` to load a [starter template](/templates/) for common use cases, like [data dashboards](templates/dashboard/), [applications](/templates/database-explorer/), [streaming](/templates/monitor-database/) updates, or [data entry](/templates/survey/).

Reviewer: The templates section doesn't feel like it fits with the rest of "What is Shiny" because everything else gives a quick intro to a concept. The value of this section is to show a full dashboard; secondarily to link to templates. Maybe you can re-align this section so it fits?

Use the command below to [create](create-run.qmd) your first application.

```bash
shiny create --template dashboard
```

::::: {.column-screen-inset}
::: {.hello-output}
<iframe
  src="https://gallery.shinyapps.io/template-dashboard/"
  frameborder="0"
  width="100%"
  class="mb-0 card hello-output-iframe"
></iframe>

<style>
  .hello-output-iframe {
    height: 700px;
  }
@media only screen and (max-width: 611px) {
  .hello-output-iframe {
    height: 2125px;
  }
}
</style>
:::
:::::

## Extensibility {#extensible}

While Shiny includes everything you need to build an app, is built on a foundation of web standards, making it highly [extensible](/docs/).

> If you need a [custom component](/docs/custom-components-pkg) or [user interface](/docs/ui-customize), you can incrementally integrate [JavaScript](/docs/custom-component-one-off), [HTML](/docs/ui-html.html), or even WebAssembly without having to learn complicated build tooling and frameworks.

Reviewer: This should be at the end of the section after the "if you're versed in web programming" sentence

<div class="btn-links">
  <a href="/components#inputs" class="btn-link-large">
    Inputs
    <i class="bi bi-sliders primary" role="img" aria-hidden="true"></i>
  </a>

  <a href="/components#outputs" class="btn-link-large">
    Outputs
    <i class="bi bi-bar-chart-line-fill primary" role="img" aria-hidden="true"></i>
  </a>

  <a  href="/layouts" class="btn-link-large">
    Layouts
    <i class="bi bi-layout-text-window-reverse primary" role="img" aria-hidden="true"></i>
  </a>
</div>

## Reactivity {#reactivity}

At the heart of Shiny is [reactivity](/docs/reactive-foundations.qmd), a system that automatically updates [outputs](/components/#outputs) when [inputs](/components/#inputs) change for seamless interactivity, without callbacks.

Shiny's reactive engine avoids unnecessary computations by only re-calculating the outputs whose inputs have changed, making Shiny ideal for fast data-driven applications, enabling live updates for [charts, tables](/components/#outputs), and [reports](https://quarto.org/docs/interactive/shiny/) with minimal effort.

Below is a Shiny application where you have the output text react to _both_ input slider values

> and the second row of text _only_ reacts to the first slider value.

Reviewer: maybe add another sentence: Try updating the sliders below. It's a live code cell, you can even update the app if you want.

```{shinylive-python}
#| standalone: true
#| components: [editor, viewer]
#| layout: vertical
#| viewerHeight: 250

> from shiny import reactive
> from shiny.express import ui, render, input
> 
> # input slider 1
> ui.input_slider("slider1", "Slider 1", min=1, max=50, value=20)
> 
> # input slider 2
> ui.input_slider("slider2", "Slider 2", min=1, max=50, value=40)
> 
> # output reacts to both sliders
> @render.text
> def both_sliders_output():
>     return f"You have set Slider 1: {input.slider1()}, Slider 2: {input.slider2()}"
> 
> # output that only reacts to slider 1
> @render.text
> def result():
>     return f"The value for slider 1 squared: {input.slider1()**2}."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
from shiny import reactive
from shiny.express import ui, render, input

ui.input_slider("s1", "Slider 1", min=0, max=10, value=5)
ui.input_slider("s2", "Slider 2", min=0, max=100, value=50)

# This output only reacts to the first slider
@render.text
def result():
    return f"{input.s1()} squared is {input.s1()**2}."

# This output reacts to both sliders
@render.text
def both_sliders_output():
    return f"{input.s1()} + {input.s2()} is {input.s1() + input.s2()}."
```

```

## Jumpstart with templates {#templates}

Below is a full Shiny application in action, complete with [reactivity](/docs/reactive-foundations.qmd) and a [user interface](/docs/ui-overview.qmd)!

> ::::: {.column-screen-inset}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
::::: {.column-screen-inset .mb-4}
```

::: {.hello-output}
<iframe
  src="https://gallery.shinyapps.io/template-dashboard/"
  frameborder="0"
  width="100%"
  class="mb-0 card hello-output-iframe"
></iframe>

<style>
  .hello-output-iframe {
    height: 700px;
  }
@media only screen and (max-width: 611px) {
  .hello-output-iframe {
    height: 2125px;
  }
}
</style>
:::
:::::

Hit the ground running with one of our [starter templates](/templates/), like the app above, by using `shiny create`.

There are templates for common use cases.
For example, [data dashboards](templates/dashboard/), [applications](/templates/database-explorer/), [streaming](/templates/monitor-database/) updates, or [data entry](/templates/survey/).

> Use the terminal command below to [create and run](create-run.qmd) your first application from a [template](/templates/).

Reviewer: Not just _your first application_ you can have this same dashboard locally with the `shiny create` command...

```bash
shiny create --template dashboard
```

## Extensibility {#extensible}

While Shiny includes everything you need to build an app, is built on a foundation of web standards, making it highly [extensible](/docs/).

If you're versed in web programming, you can also use Shiny to create [custom components](/docs/custom-component-one-off.qmd) that leverage your favorite JavaScript framework from Python.

> If you need a [custom component](/docs/custom-components-pkg) or [user interface](/docs/ui-customize), you can incrementally integrate [JavaScript](/docs/custom-component-one-off), [HTML](/docs/ui-html.html), or even WebAssembly without having to learn complicated build tooling and frameworks.

Reviewer: watch out for `custom component` used twice for different links

> The Python inputs return regular HTML:

Reviewer: Combine with first paragraph and mention "In fact, Shiny for Python is built on standard HTML..."

---

> title: What is Shiny?

Reviewer: Suppress edit/report issue links from this page (leave on the rest, tho)
https://github.com/posit-dev/py-shiny-site/pull/261#issuecomment-2822434168

```

## Jumpstart with templates {#templates}

Here's a full Shiny application in action, complete with [reactivity](/docs/reactive-foundations.qmd) and a [user interface](/docs/ui-overview.qmd)!

::::: {.column-screen-inset .mb-4}
::: {.hello-output}
<iframe
  src="https://gallery.shinyapps.io/template-dashboard/"
  frameborder="0"
  width="100%"
  class="mb-0 card hello-output-iframe"
></iframe>

<style>
  .hello-output-iframe {
    height: 700px;
  }
@media only screen and (max-width: 611px) {
  .hello-output-iframe {
    height: 2125px;
  }
}
</style>
:::
:::::

Hit the ground running with one of our [starter templates](/templates/), like the app above, by using `shiny create`.

There are templates for common use cases.
For example, [data dashboards](templates/dashboard/), [data applications](/templates/database-explorer/), [streaming updates](/templates/monitor-database/), or [data entry](/templates/survey/).

Use the terminal command below to [create and run](create-run.qmd) the same dashboard locally with `shiny create`, starting from a [template](/templates/).

```bash
shiny create --template dashboard
```

## Extensibility {#extensible}

> While Shiny includes everything you need to build an app, is built on a foundation of web standards, making it highly [extensible](/docs/custom-component-one-off.qmd).

Reviewer: fix grammar https://github.com/posit-dev/py-shiny-site/pull/261#issuecomment-2822429089

::::: {.column-screen-inset .mb-4}
::: {.hello-output}
<iframe
  src="https://gallery.shinyapps.io/template-dashboard/"
  frameborder="0"
  width="100%"
  class="mb-0 card hello-output-iframe"
></iframe>

<style>
  .hello-output-iframe {
    height: 700px;
  }
@media only screen and (max-width: 611px) {
  .hello-output-iframe {
    height: 2125px;
  }
}
</style>
:::
:::::

Hit the ground running with one of our [starter templates](/templates/), like the app above, by using `shiny create`.

There are templates for common use cases.
For example, [data dashboards](templates/dashboard/), [data applications](/templates/database-explorer/), [streaming updates](/templates/monitor-database/), or [data entry](/templates/survey/).

Use the terminal command below to [create and run](create-run.qmd) the same dashboard locally with `shiny create`, starting from a [template](/templates/).

```bash
shiny create --template dashboard
```

## Extensibility {#extensible}

While Shiny includes everything you need to build an app, it is also built on a foundation of web standards, making it highly [extensible](/docs/custom-component-one-off.qmd).

> In fact, Shiny for Python is built on standard HTML

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In fact, Shiny for Python is built on standard HTML.
```

Reviewer: idk, I think what we're trying to communicate here is the classic, _it's just standard web stuff in the end_. At this stage, I think that's a compelling thing to say. Two practical consequences of this choice are: 

1. you can use Shiny to learn about developing for the web (and lots of people have!) by inspecting our UI elements
2. you're not locked in to what we've made for you, you can always make components or apps that work with things we haven't included.

I like the idea of folding React (or other frameworks) into this section, but I think "compatible with any JavaScript framework" oversells the connection in a way that will miss people who would find the points above compelling, but would be underwhelming to people who are familiar with React or other frameworks and who might think this means it's easy to swap out frameworks.

> Here's an example of how the Shiny action button input returns a HTML `<button>`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, `ui.input_action_button()` returns an HTML `<button>` that communicates with Shiny:
```

```python
>>> from shiny import ui
>>> ui.input_action_button("btn", "Button")
```

```html
<button class="btn btn-default action-button" id="btn" type="button">Button</button>
```

If you're versed in web programming, you can use Shiny to build [one-off custom components](/docs/custom-component-one-off.qmd) that integrate your favorite JavaScript framework directly from Python.

> For more advanced needs, you can develop a [reusable component package](/docs/custom-components-pkg.qmd) or [customize the user interface](/docs/ui-customize) by incrementally [adding JavaScript](/docs/custom-component-one-off), [HTML](/docs/ui-html.html), or even [WebAssembly](/get-started/shinylive.qmd), without needing to learn complex build tools or frameworks.

Reviewer 2: There are three different linking styles here -- use `.qmd` links for all of them?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more advanced needs, you can develop a [reusable component package](/docs/custom-components-pkg.qmd) or [customize the user interface](/docs/ui-customize.qmd) by incrementally [adding JavaScript](/docs/custom-component-one-off.qmd), [HTML](/docs/ui-html.qmd), or even [WebAssembly](/get-started/shinylive.qmd), without needing to learn complex build tools or frameworks.
```
